There are two things a person should never be angry at, what they can help, and what they cannot. Courage is the first of human qualities because it is the quality which guarantees the others. Quality is not an act, it is a habit. Only the educated are free. Control thy passions lest they take vengence on thee. No man should bring children into the world who is unwilling to persevere to the end in their nature and education. Love is composed of a single soul inhabiting two bodies. People are like dirt. They can either nourish you and help you grow as a person or they can stunt your growth and make you wilt and die. Rhetoric is the art of ruling the minds of men. The key is to keep company only with people who uplift you, whose presence calls forth your best. Of all the varieties of virtues, liberalism is the most beloved. Friendship is a single soul dwelling in two bodies. Nothing in the affairs of men is worthy of great anxiety. It is the mark of an educated mind to be able to entertain a thought without accepting it. Good people do not need laws to tell them to act responsibly, while bad people will find a way around the laws. He is a drunkard who takes more than three glasses though he be not drunk. Every heart sings a song, incomplete, until another heart whispers back. Those who wish to sing always find a song. At the touch of a lover, everyone becomes a poet. We are what we repeatedly do. Excellence, then, is not an act, but a habit. Medicine to produce health must examine disease; and music, to create harmony must investigate discord. They do certainly give very strange, and newfangled, names to diseases. Riches do not exhilarate us so much with their possession as they torment us with their loss. Even when laws have been written down, they ought not always to remain unaltered. The energy of the mind is the essence of life. Music is a moral law. It gives soul to the universe, wings to the mind, flight to the imagination, and charm and gaiety to life and to everything. I don't need a friend who changes when I change and who nods when I nod; my shadow does that much better. Wise men speak because they have something to say; Fools because they have to say something. This City is what it is because our citizens are what they are. The unexamined life is not worth living. Moral excellence comes about as a result of habit. We become just by doing just acts, temperate by doing temperate acts, brave by doing brave acts. Anyone can become angry - that is easy, but to be angry with the right person at the right time, and for the right purpose and in the right way - that is not within everyone's power and that is not easy. How can you prove whether at this moment we are sleeping, and all our thoughts are a dream; or whether we are awake, and talking to one another in the waking state? The way to gain a good reputation is to endeavor to be what you desire to appear. There was never a genius without a tincture of madness. Dignity does not consist in possessing honors, but in deserving them. The ultimate value of life depends upon awareness and the power of contemplation rather than upon mere survival. True wisdom comes to each of us when we realize how little we understand about life, ourselves, and the world around us. Most people would rather give than get affection. Beware the barrenness of a busy life. Once made equal to man, woman becomes his superior. Probable impossibilities are to be preferred to improbable possibilities. When men speak ill of thee, live so as nobody may believe them. I have gained this from philosophy: that I do without being commanded what others do only from fear of the law. The secret to humor is surprise. Pleasure in the job puts perfection in the work. Excess generally causes reaction, and produces a change in the opposite direction, whether it be in the seasons, or in individuals, or in governments. Worthless people live only to eat and drink; people of worth eat and drink only to live. Make the best use of what is in your power, and take the rest as it happens. Those who intend on becoming great should love neither themselves nor their own things, but only what is just, whether it happens to be done by themselves or others. All things will be produced in superior quantity and quality, and with greater ease, when each man works at a single occupation, in accordance with his natural gifts, and at the right moment, without meddling with anything else. It is not so much our friends' help that helps us as the confident knowledge that they will help us. A great city is not to be confounded with a populous one. Apply yourself both now and in the next life. Without effort, you cannot be prosperous. Though the land be good, You cannot have an abundant crop without cultivation. Thou wilt find rest from vain fancies if thou doest every act in life as though it were thy last. You will never do anything in this world without courage. It is the greatest quality of the mind next to honor. He is a wise man who does not grieve for the things which he has not, but rejoices for those which he has. Philosophy is the highest music. I count him braver who overcomes his desires than him who conquers his enemies; for the hardest victory is over self. In a democracy the poor will have more power than the rich, because there are more of them, and the will of the majority is supreme. Ignorance of all things is an evil neither terrible nor excessive, nor yet the greatest of all; but great cleverness and much learning, if they be accompanied by a bad training, are a much greater misfortune. For a man to conquer himself is the first and noblest of all victories. Friendship is essentially a partnership. There must always remain something that is antagonistic to good. It is not he who reviles or strikes you who insults you, but your opinion that these things are insulting. The very spring and root of honesty and virtue lie in good education. Mothers are fonder than fathers of their children because they are more certain they are their own. It is folly for a man to pray to the gods for that which he has the power to obtain by himself. Suffering becomes beautiful when anyone bears great calamities with cheerfulness, not through insensibility but through greatness of mind. The virtue of justice consists in moderation, as regulated by wisdom. It is just that we should be grateful, not only to those with whose views we may agree, but also to those who have expressed more superficial views; for these also contributed something, by developing before us the powers of thought. I never desired to please the rabble. What pleased them, I did not learn; and what I knew was far removed from their understanding. Do not spoil what you have by desiring what you have not; remember that what you now have was once among the things you only hoped for. Courage stands halfway between cowardice and rashness, one of which is a lack, the other an excess of courage. The greater the difficulty the more glory in surmounting it. Skillful pilots gain their reputation from storms and tempests. When there is an income tax, the just man will pay more and the unjust less on the same amount of income. The best friend is the man who in wishing me well wishes it for my sake. What is a friend? A single soul dwelling in two bodies. The gods too are fond of a joke. Know how to listen, and you will profit even from those who talk badly. The roots of education are bitter, but the fruit is sweet. What it lies in our power to do, it lies in our power not to do. A few vices are sufficient to darken many virtues. The ideal man bears the accidents of life with dignity and grace, making the best of circumstances. I am called a dog because I fawn on those who give me anything, I yelp at those who refuse, and I set my teeth in rascals. Fear is pain arising from the anticipation of evil. It is impossible to begin to learn that which one thinks one already knows. You can discover more about a person in an hour of play than in a year of conversation. It's not what happens to you, but how you react to it that matters. Both oligarch and tyrant mistrust the people, and therefore deprive them of their arms. Imagine for yourself a character, a model personality, whose example you determine to follow, in private as well as in public. No one would choose a friendless existence on condition of having all the other things in the world. In poverty and other misfortunes of life, true friends are a sure refuge. The young they keep out of mischief; to the old they are a comfort and aid in their weakness, and those in the prime of life they incite to noble deeds. The end of life is to be like God, and the soul following God will be like Him. All men's souls are immortal, but the souls of the righteous are immortal and divine. The mind is not a vessel to be filled but a fire to be kindled. Knowledge without justice ought to be called cunning rather than wisdom. If virtue promises happiness, prosperity and peace, then progress in virtue is progress in each of these for to whatever point the perfection of anything brings us, progress is always an approach toward it. Skillful pilots gain their reputation from storms and tempest. God has entrusted me with myself. To accuse others for one's own misfortunes is a sign of want of education. To accuse oneself shows that one's education has begun. To accuse neither oneself nor others shows that one's education is complete. The greater difficulty, the more glory in surmounting it. Skillful pilots gain their reputation from storms and tempests. It is impossible to live a pleasant life without living wisely and well and justly. And it is impossible to live wisely and well and justly without living a pleasant life. To God everything is beautiful, good, and just; humans, however, think some things are unjust and others just. The educated differ from the uneducated as much as the living from the dead. Youth is easily deceived because it is quick to hope. Good habits formed at youth make all the difference. Hope of ill gain is the beginning of loss. The least initial deviation from the truth is multiplied later a thousandfold. The generality of men are naturally apt to be swayed by fear rather than reverence, and to refrain from evil rather because of the punishment that it brings than because of its own foulness. No notice is taken of a little evil, but when it increases it strikes the eye. Temperance is a mean with regard to pleasures. The aim of art is to represent not the outward appearance of things, but their inward significance. If a man is proud of his wealth, he should not be praised until it is known how he employs it. Eyes and ears are poor witnesses to people if they have uncultured souls. He who hath many friends hath none. The end of labor is to gain leisure. For as the eyes of bats are to the blaze of day, so is the reason in our soul to the things which are by nature most evident of all. Raising children is an uncertain thing; success is reached only after a life of battle and worry. It is Homer who has chiefly taught other poets the art of telling lies skillfully. He who can be, and therefore is, another's, and he who participates in reason enough to apprehend, but not to have, is a slave by nature. A constitution is the arrangement of magistracies in a state. A tragedy is a representation of an action that is whole and complete and of a certain magnitude. A whole is what has a beginning and middle and end. All human actions have one or more of these seven causes: chance, nature, compulsions, habit, reason, passion, desire. Everything existing in the universe is the fruit of chance and necessity. I would rather discover one true cause than gain the kingdom of Persia. If thou suffer injustice, console thyself; the true unhappiness is in doing it. It is godlike ever to think on something beautiful and on something new. It is greed to do all the talking but not to want to listen at all. Nothing exists except atoms and empty space; everything else is opinion. A man's character is his fate. Deliberate violence is more to be quenched than a fire. Even sleepers are workers and collaborators in what goes on in the Universe. The best people renounce all for one goal, the eternal fame of mortals; but most people stuff themselves like cattle. The way up and the way down are one and the same. Piety requires us to honor truth above our friends. To find fault is easy; to do better may be difficult. Good actions give strength to ourselves and inspire good actions in others. In all things of nature there is something of the marvelous. The young are permanently in a state resembling intoxication. Dignity consists not in possessing honors, but in the consciousness that we deserve them. If liberty and equality, as is thought by some, are chiefly to be found in democracy, they will be best attained when all persons alike share in government to the utmost. Misfortune shows those who are not really friends. Education is the best provision for old age. No excellent soul is exempt from a mixture of madness. Poetry is finer and more philosophical than history; for poetry expresses the universal, and history only the particular. The greater the difficulty, the more the glory in surmounting it. The worst form of inequality is to try to make unequal things equal. Moral habits, induced by public practices, are far quicker in making their way into men's private lives, than the failings and faults of individuals are in infecting the city at large. Music is the movement of sound to reach the soul for the education of its virtue. Education is an ornament in prosperity and a refuge in adversity. The one exclusive sign of thorough knowledge is the power of teaching. Difficulties are things that show a person what they are. Love is a serious mental disease. People are not disturbed by things, but by the view they take of them. Whoever does not regard what he has as most ample wealth, is unhappy, though he be master of the world. Democracy arises out of the notion that those who are equal in any respect are equal in all respects; because men are equally free, they claim to be absolutely equal. Know, first, who you are, and then adorn yourself accordingly. When you are offended at any man's fault, turn to yourself and study your own failings. Then you will forget your anger. All paid jobs absorb and degrade the mind. No greater thing is created suddenly, any more than a bunch of grapes or a fig. If you tell me that you desire a fig, I answer you that there must be time. Let it first blossom, then bear fruit, then ripen. Nothing can be more absurd than the practice that prevails in our country of men and women not following the same pursuits with all their strengths and with one mind, for thus, the state instead of being whole is reduced to half. It is not once nor twice but times without number that the same ideas make their appearance in the world. Honesty is for the most part less profitable than dishonesty. Poetry is nearer to vital truth than history. It is not living that matters, but living rightly. I know that I am intelligent, because I know that I know nothing. The only true wisdom is in knowing you know nothing. Be as you wish to seem. From the deepest desires often come the deadliest hate. An honest man is always a child. He is richest who is content with the least, for content is the wealth of nature. He is a man of courage who does not run away, but remains at his post and fights against the enemy. As for me, all I know is that I know nothing. Wisdom begins in wonder. True knowledge exists in knowing that you know nothing. Beauty is a short-lived tyranny. One who is injured ought not to return the injury, for on no account can it be right to do an injustice; and it is not right to return an injury, or to do evil to any man, however much we have suffered from him. The poets are only the interpreters of the Gods. False words are not only evil in themselves, but they infect the soul with evil. I am the wisest man alive, for I know one thing, and that is that I know nothing. Our prayers should be for blessings in general, for God knows best what is good for us. A system of morality which is based on relative emotional values is a mere illusion, a thoroughly vulgar conception which has nothing sound in it and nothing true. The greatest way to live with honor in this world is to be what we pretend to be. Beauty is the bait which with delight allures man to enlarge his kind. Not life, but good life, is to be chiefly valued. Where there is reverence there is fear, but there is not reverence everywhere that there is fear, because fear presumably has a wider extension than reverence. I only wish that ordinary people had an unlimited capacity for doing harm; then they might have an unlimited power for doing good. If all misfortunes were laid in one common heap whence everyone must take an equal portion, most people would be contented to take their own and depart. My advice to you is get married: if you find a good wife you'll be happy; if not, you'll become a philosopher. We praise a man who feels angry on the right grounds and against the right persons and also in the right manner at the right moment and for the right length of time. To make no mistakes is not in the power of man; but from their errors and mistakes the wise and good learn wisdom for the future. No one ever teaches well who wants to teach, or governs well who wants to govern. He was a wise man who invented beer. A hero is born among a hundred, a wise man is found among a thousand, but an accomplished one might not be found even among a hundred thousand men. The most virtuous are those who content themselves with being virtuous without seeking to appear so. Men are swayed more by fear than by reverence. He who is to be a good ruler must have first been ruled. Plato is dear to me, but dearer still is truth. A friend to all is a friend to none. No law or ordinance is mightier than understanding. Wit is educated insolence. The greatest wealth is to live content with little. It is unbecoming for young men to utter maxims. The beginning of reform is not so much to equalize property as to train the noble sort of natures not to desire more, and to prevent the lower from getting more. Men acquire a particular quality by constantly acting in a particular way. Misfortune seldom intrudes upon the wise man; his greatest and highest interests are directed by reason throughout the course of life. Those who educate children well are more to be honored than they who produce them; for these only gave them life, those the art of living well. The beginning is the most important part of the work. Let parents bequeath to their children not riches, but the spirit of reverence. Democracy passes into despotism. Life must be lived as play. Wise men talk because they have something to say; fools, because they have to say something. Opinion is the medium between knowledge and ignorance. Knowledge becomes evil if the aim be not virtuous. It is clear to everyone that astronomy at all events compels the soul to look upwards, and draws it from the things of this world to the other. When the mind is thinking it is talking to itself. Courage is a kind of salvation. Man - a being in search of meaning. The man who makes everything that leads to happiness depends upon himself, and not upon other men, has adopted the very best plan for living happily. This is the man of moderation, the man of manly character and of wisdom. Love is the joy of the good, the wonder of the wise, the amazement of the Gods. He who is of calm and happy nature will hardly feel the pressure of age, but to him who is of an opposite disposition youth and age are equally a burden. Cunning... is but the low mimic of wisdom. To love rightly is to love what is orderly and beautiful in an educated and disciplined way. We are twice armed if we fight with faith. The learning and knowledge that we have, is, at the most, but little compared with that of which we are ignorant. They certainly give very strange names to diseases. Knowledge which is acquired under compulsion obtains no hold on the mind. This and no other is the root from which a tyrant springs; when he first appears he is a protector. The curse of me and my nation is that we always think things can be bettered by immediate action of some sort, any sort rather than no sort. Science is nothing but perception. Knowledge is true opinion. It is right to give every man his due. All men are by nature equal, made all of the same earth by one Workman; and however we deceive ourselves, as dear unto God is the poor peasant as the mighty prince. We ought to esteem it of the greatest importance that the fictions which children first hear should be adapted in the most perfect manner to the promotion of virtue. Whatever deceives men seems to produce a magical enchantment. We ought to fly away from earth to heaven as quickly as we can; and to fly away is to become like God, as far as this is possible; and to become like him is to become holy, just, and wise. States are as the men, they grow out of human characters. Wealth is well known to be a great comforter. Wisdom alone is the science of others sciences. Character is simply habit long continued. Let us carefully observe those good qualities wherein our enemies excel us; and endeavor to excel them, by avoiding what is faulty, and imitating what is excellent in them. No man ever wetted clay and then left it, as if there would be bricks by chance and fortune. The real destroyer of the liberties of the people is he who spreads among them bounties, donations and benefits. All men whilst they are awake are in one common world: but each of them, when he is asleep, is in a world of his own. To be ignorant of the lives of the most celebrated men of antiquity is to continue in a state of childhood all our days. It is part of a good man to do great and noble deeds, though he risk everything. When the strong box contains no more both friends and flatterers shun the door. I would rather excel in the knowledge of what is excellent, than in the extent of my power and possessions. Painting is silent poetry, and poetry is painting that speaks. Character is long-standing habit. Fate leads him who follows it, and drags him who resist. Do not speak of your happiness to one less fortunate than yourself. The omission of good is no less reprehensible than the commission of evil. Silence at the proper season is wisdom, and better than any speech. An imbalance between rich and poor is the oldest and most fatal ailment of all republics. Perseverance is more prevailing than violence; and many things which cannot be overcome when they are together, yield themselves up when taken little by little. Neither blame or praise yourself. We ought not to treat living creatures like shoes or household belongings, which when worn with use we throw away. Nothing is harder to direct than a man in prosperity; nothing more easily managed that one is adversity. Prosperity is no just scale; adversity is the only balance to weigh friends. Courage consists not in hazarding without fear; but being resolutely minded in a just cause. We must no more ask whether the soul and body are one than ask whether the wax and the figure impressed on it are one. Homer has taught all other poets the art of telling lies skillfully. A true friend is one soul in two bodies. He who is unable to live in society, or who has no need because he is sufficient for himself, must be either a beast or a god. Those who excel in virtue have the best right of all to rebel, but then they are of all men the least inclined to do so. Bashfulness is an ornament to youth, but a reproach to old age. Bad men are full of repentance. Well begun is half done. Different men seek after happiness in different ways and by different means, and so make for themselves different modes of life and forms of government. What the statesman is most anxious to produce is a certain moral character in his fellow citizens, namely a disposition to virtue and the performance of virtuous actions. Bring your desires down to your present means. Increase them only when your increased means permit. The soul never thinks without a picture. Happiness depends upon ourselves. Men create gods after their own image, not only with regard to their form but with regard to their mode of life. All virtue is summed up in dealing justly. The aim of the wise is not to secure pleasure, but to avoid pain. Change in all things is sweet. If one way be better than another, that you may be sure is nature's way. Hope is the dream of a waking man. All men by nature desire to know. First learn the meaning of what you say, and then speak. The essence of philosophy is that a man should so live that his happiness shall depend as little as possible on external things. If you wish to be a writer, write. There is nothing good or evil save in the will. Practice yourself, for heaven's sake in little things, and then proceed to greater. Is freedom anything else than the right to live as we wish? Nothing else. Not every difficult and dangerous thing is suitable for training, but only that which is conducive to success in achieving the object of our effort. You may be always victorious if you will never enter into any contest where the issue does not wholly depend upon yourself. Freedom is the right to live as we wish. No man is free who is not master of himself. If God listened to the prayers of men, all men would quickly have perished: for they are forever praying for evil against one another. There is only one way to happiness and that is to cease worrying about things which are beyond the power of our will. If evil be spoken of you and it be true, correct yourself, if it be a lie, laugh at it. Wealth consists not in having great possessions, but in having few wants. No great thing is created suddenly. You are a little soul carrying around a corpse. Be careful to leave your sons well instructed rather than rich, for the hopes of the instructed are better than the wealth of the ignorant. First say to yourself what you would be; and then do what you have to do. We have two ears and one mouth so that we can listen twice as much as we speak. Freedom is not procured by a full enjoyment of what is desired, but by controlling the desire. It is the nature of the wise to resist pleasures, but the foolish to be a slave to them. Nothing is enough for the man to whom enough is too little. We do not so much need the help of our friends as the confidence of their help in need. The art of living well and the art of dying well are one. Of all the things which wisdom acquires to produce the blessedness of the complete life far the greatest is the possession of Friendship. The misfortune of the wise is better than the prosperity of the fool. If thou wilt make a man happy, add not unto his riches but take away from his desires. It is better for you to be free of fear lying upon a pallet,than to have a golden couch and a rich table and be full of trouble. The time when most of you should withdraw into yourself is when you are forced to be in a crowd. All men by nature desire knowledge. We are not to give credit to the many, who say that none ought to be educated but the free; but rather to the philosophers, who say that the well-educated alone are free. I have hardly ever known a mathematician who was capable of reasoning. Silence is safer than speech. The direction in which education starts a man will determine his future in life. The excessive increase of anything causes a reaction in the opposite direction. A sense is what has the power of receiving into itself the sensible forms of things without the matter, in the way in which a piece of wax takes on the impress of a signet-ring without the iron or gold. No one loves the man whom he fears. The law is reason, free from passion. At his best, man is the noblest of all animals; separated from law and justice he is the worst. There is no harm in repeating a good thing. Justice in the life and conduct of the State is possible only as first it resides in the hearts and souls of the citizens. Keep silence for the most part, and speak only when you must, and then briefly. Neither should a ship rely on one small anchor, nor should life rest on a single hope. To go to the world below, having a soul which is like a vessel full of injustice, is the last and worst of all the evils. He who is not a good servant will not be a good master. If one oversteps the bounds of moderation, the greatest pleasures cease to please. Justice... is a kind of compact not to harm or be harmed. Knowledge which is acquired under compulsion has no hold on the mind. Necessity... the mother of invention. When a Benefit is wrongly conferred, the author of the Benefit may often be said to injure. Entire ignorance is not so terrible or extreme an evil, and is far from being the greatest of all; too much cleverness and too much learning, accompanied with ill bringing-up, are far more fatal. Difficulties show men what they are. In case of any difficulty remember that God has pitted you against a rough antagonist that you may be a conqueror, and this cannot be without toil. Do not laugh much or often or unrestrainedly. Do not seek to bring things to pass in accordance with your wishes, but wish for them as they are, and you will find them. Excellence, then, is a state concerned with choice, lying in a mean, relative to us, this being determined by reason and in the way in which the man of practical wisdom would determine it. For to err in opinion, though it be not the part of wise men, is at least human. We do not learn; and what we call learning is only a process of recollection. Of all things which wisdom provides to make life entirely happy, much the greatest is the possession of friendship. The rulers of the state are the only persons who ought to have the privilege of lying, either at home or abroad; they may be allowed to lie for the good of the state. We become just by performing just action, temperate by performing temperate actions, brave by performing brave action. There is no such thing as justice in the abstract; it is merely a compact between men. Dogs and philosophers do the greatest good and get the fewest rewards. Men are disturbed not by things, but by the view which they take of them. Man is a wingless animal with two feet and flat nails. It were better to have no opinion of God at all than such a one as is unworthy of him; for the one is only belief - the other contempt. Better a little which is well done, than a great deal imperfectly. Ignorance, the root and stem of all evil. Injustice is censured because the censures are afraid of suffering, and not from any fear which they have of doing injustice. Thinking: the talking of the soul with itself. It is clearly better that property should be private, but the use of it common; and the special business of the legislator is to create in men this benevolent disposition. The beginning is the chiefest part of any work. It is indeed a desirable thing to be well-descended, but the glory belongs to our ancestors. One man cannot practice many arts with success. Our object in the construction of the state is the greatest happiness of the whole, and not that of any one class. Those that know, do. Those that understand, teach. Nothing great is created suddenly, any more than a bunch of grapes or a fig. If you tell me that you desire a fig. I answer you that there must be time. Let it first blossom, then bear fruit, then ripen. Hope is a waking dream. This is the reason why mothers are more devoted to their children than fathers: it is that they suffer more in giving them birth and are more certain that they are their own. Whosoever is delighted in solitude is either a wild beast or a god. Wishing to be friends is quick work, but friendship is a slow ripening fruit. And what, Socrates, is the food of the soul? Surely, I said, knowledge is the food of the soul. Any man may easily do harm, but not every man can do good to another. The greatest virtues are those which are most useful to other persons. It is best to rise from life as from a banquet, neither thirsty nor drunken. The excessive increase of anything often causes a reaction in the opposite direction. If thy brother wrongs thee, remember not so much his wrong-doing, but more than ever that he is thy brother. Not to help justice in her need would be an impiety. I never did anything worth doing by accident, nor did any of my inventions come by accident; they came by work. No one is a friend to his friend who does not love in return. The moral virtues, then, are produced in us neither by nature nor against nature. Nature, indeed, prepares in us the ground for their reception, but their complete formation is the product of habit. Anybody can become angry - that is easy, but to be angry with the right person and to the right degree and at the right time and for the right purpose, and in the right way - that is not within everybody's power and is not easy. Perfect friendship is the friendship of men who are good, and alike in excellence; for these wish well alike to each other qua good, and they are good in themselves. The punishment which the wise suffer who refuse to take part in the government, is to live under the government of worse men. Then not only an old man, but also a drunkard, becomes a second time a child. Wonder is the feeling of the philosopher, and philosophy begins in wonder. Without friends no one would choose to live, though he had all other goods. Your silence gives consent. Attention to health is life greatest hindrance. As the builders say, the larger stones do not lie well without the lesser. Astronomy compels the soul to look upwards and leads us from this world to another. The blame is his who chooses: God is blameless. By all means, marry. If you get a good wife, you'll become happy; if you get a bad one, you'll become a philosopher. Let him that would move the world first move himself. Employ your time in improving yourself by other men's writings, so that you shall gain easily what others have labored hard for. Every art and every inquiry, and similarly every action and choice, is thought to aim at some good; and for this reason the good has rightly been declared to be that at which all things aim. Courage is a mean with regard to fear and confidence. Excellence is an art won by training and habituation. We do not act rightly because we have virtue or excellence, but we rather have those because we have acted rightly. We are what we repeatedly do. Excellence, then, is not an act but a habit. For one swallow does not make a summer, nor does one day; and so too one day, or a short time, does not make a man blessed and happy. For though we love both the truth and our friends, piety requires us to honor the truth first. Hence poetry is something more philosophic and of graver import than history, since its statements are rather of the nature of universals, whereas those of history are singulars. In making a speech one must study three points: first, the means of producing persuasion; second, the language; third the proper arrangement of the various parts of the speech. Jealousy is both reasonable and belongs to reasonable men, while envy is base and belongs to the base, for the one makes himself get good things by jealousy, while the other does not allow his neighbour to have them through envy. My best friend is the man who in wishing me well wishes it for my sake. Nature does nothing uselessly. The wise man does not expose himself needlessly to danger, since there are few things for which he cares sufficiently; but he is willing, in great crises, to give even his life - knowing that under certain conditions it is not worthwhile to live. By all means marry. If you get a good wife, you'll be happy. If you get a bad one, you'll become a philosopher and that is a good thing for any man. A friend is one soul abiding in two bodies. He has the most who is most content with the least. I have nothing to ask but that you would remove to the other side, that you may not, by intercepting the sunshine, take from me what you cannot give. I know nothing, except the fact of my ignorance. It takes a wise man to discover a wise man. It was a favorite expression of Theophrastus that time was the most valuable thing that a man could spend. Man is the most intelligent of the animals - and the most silly. Stand a little less between me and the sun. The great thieves lead away the little thief. The mob is the mother of tyrants. The sun too penetrates into privies, but is not polluted by them. The sun, too, shines into cesspools and is not polluted. The vine bears three kinds of grapes: the first of pleasure, the second of intoxication, the third of disgust. We have two ears and one tongue so that we would listen more and talk less. Wise kings generally have wise counselors; and he must be a wise man himself who is capable of distinguishing one. All philosophy lies in two words, sustain and abstain. If you desire to be good, begin by believing that you are wicked. If you seek truth you will not seek victory by dishonorable means, and if you find truth you will become invincible. One that desires to excel should endeavor in those things that are in themselves most excellent. The two powers which in my opinion constitute a wise man are those of bearing and forbearing. We should not moor a ship with one anchor, or our life with one hope. We tell lies, yet it is easy to show that lying is immoral. Whenever you are angry, be assured that it is not only a present evil, but that you have increased a habit. A free life cannot acquire many possessions, because this is not easy to do without servility to mobs or monarchs. Of all the things which wisdom provides to make us entirely happy, much the greatest is the possession of friendship. The highest reach of injustice is to be deemed just when you are not. Poets utter great and wise things which they do not themselves understand. A good decision is based on knowledge and not on numbers. A state arises, as I conceive, out of the needs of mankind; no one is self-sufficing, but all of us have many wants. All the gold which is under or upon the earth is not enough to give in exchange for virtue. At the touch of love everyone becomes a poet. Democracy... is a charming form of government, full of variety and disorder; and dispensing a sort of equality to equals and unequals alike. For good nurture and education implant good constitutions. Hardly any human being is capable of pursuing two professions or two arts rightly. He who commits injustice is ever made more wretched than he who suffers it. He who is of a calm and happy nature will hardly feel the pressure of age, but to him who is of an opposite disposition youth and age are equally a burden. He who steals a little steals with the same wish as he who steals much, but with less power. Human behavior flows from three main sources: desire, emotion, and knowledge. I shall assume that your silence gives consent. I would fain grow old learning many things. If a man neglects education, he walks lame to the end of his life. If particulars are to have meaning, there must be universals. It is a common saying, and in everybody's mouth, that life is but a sojourn. Justice means minding one's own business and not meddling with other men's concerns. Man never legislates, but destinies and accidents, happening in all sorts of ways, legislate in all sorts of ways. The community which has neither poverty nor riches will always have the noblest principles. The eyes of the soul of the multitudes are unable to endure the vision of the divine. The first and greatest victory is to conquer yourself; to be conquered by yourself is of all things most shameful and vile. The gods' service is tolerable, man's intolerable. The good is the beautiful. The wisest have the most authority. Then not only custom, but also nature affirms that to do is more disgraceful than to suffer injustice, and that justice is equality. There are three classes of men; lovers of wisdom, lovers of honor, and lovers of gain. There's a victory, and defeat; the first and best of victories, the lowest and worst of defeats which each man gains or sustains at the hands not of another, but of himself. To prefer evil to good is not in human nature; and when a man is compelled to choose one of two evils, no one will choose the greater when he might have the less. To suffer the penalty of too much haste, which is too little speed. Truth is the beginning of every good to the gods, and of every good to man. Twice and thrice over, as they say, good is it to repeat and review what is good. Tyranny naturally arises out of democracy. Virtue is relative to the actions and ages of each of us in all that we do. In words are seen the state of mind and character and disposition of the speaker. The wildest colts make the best horses. I decided that it was not wisdom that enabled poets to write their poetry, but a kind of instinct or inspiration, such as you find in seers and prophets who deliver all their sublime messages without knowing in the least what they mean. The whole is more than the sum of its parts. Character may almost be called the most effective means of persuasion. Those who aim at great deeds must also suffer greatly. The most important part of education is proper training in the nursery. It is better to destroy one's own errors than those of others. Nature does nothing in vain. Inferiors revolt in order that they may be equal, and equals that they may be superior. Such is the state of mind which creates revolutions. Justice will overtake fabricators of lies and false witnesses. We can easily forgive a child who is afraid of the dark; the real tragedy of life is when men are afraid of the light. The world turns aside to let any man pass who knows where he is going. Throw moderation to the winds, and the greatest pleasures bring the greatest pains. Never in any case say I have lost such a thing, but I have returned it. Is your child dead? It is a return. Is your wife dead? It is a return. Are you deprived of your estate? is not this also a return? I exhort you also to take part in the great combat, which is the combat of life, and greater than every other earthly conflict. Republics decline into democracies and democracies degenerate into despotisms. Hide our ignorance as we will, an evening of wine soon reveals it. There are only two people who can tell you the truth about yourself - an enemy who has lost his temper and a friend who loves you dearly. In nine cases out of ten, a woman had better show more affection than she feels. I would rather be first in a little Iberian village than second in Rome. Our envy always lasts longer than the happiness of those we envy. As iron is eaten away by rust, so the envious are consumed by their own passion. Pay attention to your enemies, for they are the first to discover your mistakes. Corpses are more fit to be thrown out than is dung. Change alone is unchanging. Men who wish to know about the world must learn about it in its particular details. Even sleepers are workers and collaborators on what goes on in the universe. Bigotry is the sacred disease. Nature is wont to hide herself. The eyes are more exact witnesses than the ears. If you do not the expect the unexpected you will not find it, for it is not to be reached by search or trail. To do the same thing over and over again is not only boredom: it is to be controlled by rather than to control what you do. Nothing endures but change. Much learning does not teach understanding. Character is destiny. It is hard to contend against one's heart's desire; for whatever it wishes to have it buys at the cost of soul. It is the privilege of the gods to want nothing, and of godlike men to want little. Most men are within a finger's breadth of being mad. Those who have virtue always in their mouths, and neglect it in practice, are like a harp, which emits a sound pleasing to others, while itself is insensible of the music. The most useful piece of learning for the uses of life is to unlearn what is untrue. Observe your enemies, for they first find out your faults. I am sadly afraid that I must have done some wicked thing. Not to unlearn what you have learned is the most necessary kind of learning. The foundation of every state is the education of its youth. Blushing is the color of virtue. Big results require big ambitions. Man is most nearly himself when he achieves the seriousness of a child at play. You could not step twice into the same rivers; for other waters are ever flowing on to you. You cannot step twice into the same river; for other waters are continually flowing in. Couples are wholes and not wholes, what agrees disagrees, the concordant is discordant. From all things one and from one all things. You cannot step into the same river twice. There is nothing permanent except change. No man ever steps in the same river twice, for it's not the same river and he's not the same man. The chain of wedlock is so heavy that it takes two to carry it - and sometimes three. The art of measurement, by showing us the truth would have brought our soul into the repose of abiding by the truth, and so would have saved our life. No one that encounters prosperity does not also encounter danger. Opposition brings concord. Out of discord comes the fairest harmony. A man's character is his guardian divinity. When it comes to consideration of how to do well in running the city, which must proceed entirely through justice and soundness of mind. No intelligent man believes that anybody ever willingly errs or willingly does base and evil deeds; they are well aware that all who do base and evil things to them unwillingly. The Athenians are right to accept advice from anyone, since it is incumbent on everyone to share in that sort of excellence, or else there can be no city at all. Let us hold our discussion together in our own persons, making trial of the truth and of ourselves. It takes more than just a good looking body. You've got to have the heart and soul to go with it. The wrongdoer is more unfortunate than the man wronged. Men should strive to think much and know little. By desiring little, a poor man makes himself rich. Now as of old the gods give men all good things, excepting only those that are baneful and injurious and useless. These, now as of old, are not gifts of the gods: men stumble into them themselves because of their own blindness and folly. Happiness resides not in possessions, and not in gold, happiness dwells in the soul. I would rather discover a single causal connection than win the throne of Persia. Good means not merely not to do wrong, but rather not to desire to do wrong. What I like to drink most is wine that belongs to others. As a matter of self-preservation, a man needs good friends or ardent enemies, for the former instruct him and the latter take him to task. I threw my cup away when I saw a child drinking from his hands at the trough. I do not know whether there are gods, but there ought to be. There is only a finger's difference between a wise man and a fool. Modesty is the color of virtue. The sun is new each day. No man is hurt but by himself Quarrels often arise in marriages when the bridal gifts are excessive.